

This is the model of atorvastatin metabolism in hepaitc cells described in the
article:  
**A systems biology approach to dynamic modeling and inter-subject variability of statin pharmacokinetics in human hepatocytes**   
Joachim Bucher , Stephan Riedmaier , Anke Schnabel , Katrin Marcus , Gabriele
Vacun , Thomas S Weiss , Wolfgang E Thasler , Andreas K Nussler , Ulrich M
Zanger and Matthias Reuss. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:66.
DOI:[10.1186/1752-0509-5-66](http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1752-0509-5-66)

Abstract:  
Background:  
The individual character of pharmacokinetics is of great importance in the
risk assessment of new drug leads in pharmacological research. Amongst others,
it is severely influenced by the properties and inter-individual variability
of the enzymes and transporters of the drug detoxification system of the
liver. Predicting individual drug biotransformation capacity requires
quantitative and detailed models.  
Results:  
In this contribution we present the de novo deterministic modeling of
atorvastatin biotransformation based on comprehensive published knowledge on
involved metabolic and transport pathways as well as physicochemical
properties. The model was evaluated in primary human hepatocytes and parameter
identifiability analysis was performed under multiple experimental
constraints. Dynamic simulations of atorvastatin biotransformation considering
the inter-individual variability of the two major involved enzymes CYP3A4 and
UGT1A3 based on quantitative protein expression data in a large human liver
bank (n=150) highlighted the variability in the individual biotransformation
profiles and therefore also points to the individuality of pharmacokinetics.  
Conclusions:  
A dynamic model for the biotransformation of atorvastatin has been developed
using quantitative metabolite measurements in primary human hepatocytes. The
model comprises kinetics for transport processes and metabolic enzymes as well
as population liver expression data allowing us to assess the impact of inter-
individual variability of concentrations of key proteins. Application of
computational tools for parameter sensitivity analysis enabled us to
considerably improve the validity of the model and to create a consistent
framework for precise computer-aided simulations in toxicology.

The model is parameterized for patient 1 and reproduces the time courses in
figure 2 of the article.

